<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Knot V: Oughts and Crosses</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="se:label">Knot</span>
						<span epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">V</span>
					</h2>
					<p epub:type="title">Oughts and Crosses</p>
				</hgroup>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
					<p>‚ÄúLook here, upon this picture, and on this.‚Äù</p>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>‚ÄúAnd what made you choose the first train, Goosey?‚Äù said Mad Mathesis, as they got into the cab. ‚ÄúCouldn‚Äôt you count better than <em>that</em>?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI took an extreme case,‚Äù was the tearful reply. ‚ÄúOur excellent preceptress always says ‚ÄòWhen in doubt, my dears, take an extreme case.‚Äô And I <em>was</em> in doubt.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDoes it always succeed?‚Äù her aunt enquired.</p>
			<p>Clara sighed. ‚ÄúNot <em>always</em>,‚Äù she reluctantly admitted. ‚ÄúAnd I can‚Äôt make out why. One day she was telling the little girls‚ÅÝ‚Äîthey make such a noise at tea, you know‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚ÄòThe more noise you make, the less jam you will have, and vice versa.‚Äô And I thought they wouldn‚Äôt know what ‚Äòvice versa‚Äô meant: so I explained it to them. I said ‚ÄòIf you make an infinite noise, you‚Äôll get no jam: and if you make no noise, you‚Äôll get an infinite lot of jam.‚Äô But our excellent preceptress said that wasn‚Äôt a good instance. <em>Why</em> wasn‚Äôt it?‚Äù she added plaintively.</p>
			<p>Her aunt evaded the question. ‚ÄúOne sees certain objections to it,‚Äù she said. ‚ÄúBut how did you work it with the Metropolitan trains? None of them go infinitely fast, I believe.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI called them hares and tortoises,‚Äù Clara said‚ÅÝ‚Äîa little timidly, for she dreaded being laughed at. ‚ÄúAnd I thought there couldn‚Äôt be so many hares as tortoises on the Line: so I took an extreme case‚ÅÝ‚Äîone hare and an infinite number of tortoises.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAn extreme case, indeed,‚Äù her aunt remarked with admirable gravity: ‚Äúand a most dangerous state of things!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAnd I thought, if I went with a tortoise, there would be only <em>one</em> hare to meet: but if I went with the hare‚ÅÝ‚Äîyou know there were <em>crowds</em> of tortoises!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt wasn‚Äôt a bad idea,‚Äù said the elder lady, as they left the cab, at the entrance of Burlington House. ‚ÄúYou shall have another chance today. We‚Äôll have a match in marking pictures.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Clara brightened up. ‚ÄúI should like to try again, very much,‚Äù she said. ‚ÄúI‚Äôll take more care this time. How are we to play?‚Äù</p>
			<p>To this question Mad Mathesis made no reply: she was busy drawing lines down the margins of the catalogue. ‚ÄúSee,‚Äù she said after a minute, ‚ÄúI‚Äôve drawn three columns against the names of the pictures in the long room, and I want you to fill them with oughts and crosses‚ÅÝ‚Äîcrosses for good marks and oughts for bad. The first column is for choice of subject, the second for arrangement, the third for colouring. And these are the conditions of the match. You must give three crosses to two or three pictures. You must give two crosses to four or five‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDo you mean <em>only</em> two crosses?‚Äù said Clara. ‚ÄúOr may I count the three-cross pictures among the two-cross pictures?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOf course you may,‚Äù said her aunt. ‚ÄúAnyone, that has <em>three</em> eyes, may be said to have <em>two</em> eyes, I suppose?‚Äù</p>
			<p>Clara followed her aunt‚Äôs dreamy gaze across the crowded gallery, half-dreading to find that there was a three-eyed person in sight.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAnd you must give one cross to nine or ten.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAnd which wins the match?‚Äù Clara asked, as she carefully entered these conditions on a blank leaf in her catalogue.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhichever marks fewest pictures.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBut suppose we marked the same number?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThen whichever uses most marks.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Clara considered. ‚ÄúI don‚Äôt think it‚Äôs much of a match,‚Äù she said. ‚ÄúI shall mark nine pictures, and give three crosses to three of them, two crosses to two more, and one cross each to all the rest.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWill you, indeed?‚Äù said her aunt. ‚ÄúWait till you‚Äôve heard all the conditions, my impetuous child. You must give three oughts to one or two pictures, two oughts to three or four, and one ought to eight or nine. I don‚Äôt want you to be <em>too</em> hard on the <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism z3998:name-title">R.A.</abbr>‚Äôs.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Clara quite gasped as she wrote down all these fresh conditions. ‚ÄúIt‚Äôs a great deal worse than Circulating Decimals!‚Äù she said. ‚ÄúBut I‚Äôm determined to win, all the same!‚Äù</p>
			<p>Her aunt smiled grimly. ‚ÄúWe can begin <em>here</em>,‚Äù she said, as they paused before a gigantic picture, which the catalogue informed them was the <i epub:type="se:name.visual-art.painting">Portrait of Lieutenant Brown, Mounted on His Favorite Elephant</i>.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHe looks awfully conceited!‚Äù said Clara. ‚ÄúI don‚Äôt think he was the elephant‚Äôs favorite Lieutenant. What a hideous picture it is! And it takes up room enough for twenty!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúMind what you say, my dear!‚Äù her aunt interposed. ‚ÄúIt‚Äôs by an <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">R.A.</abbr>!‚Äù</p>
			<p>But Clara was quite reckless. ‚ÄúI don‚Äôt care who it‚Äôs by!‚Äù she cried. ‚ÄúAnd I shall give it three bad marks!‚Äù</p>
			<p>Aunt and niece soon drifted away from each other in the crowd, and for the next half-hour Clara was hard at work, putting in marks and rubbing them out again, and hunting up and down for suitable pictures. This she found the hardest part of all. ‚ÄúI <em>can‚Äôt</em> find the one I want!‚Äù she exclaimed at last, almost crying with vexation.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhat is it you want to find, my dear?‚Äù The voice was strange to Clara, but so sweet and gentle that she felt attracted to the owner of it, even before she had seen her; and when she turned, and met the smiling looks of two little old ladies, whose round dimpled faces, exactly alike, seemed never to have known a care, it was as much as she could do‚ÅÝ‚Äîas she confessed to Aunt Mattie afterwards‚ÅÝ‚Äîto keep herself from hugging them both.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI was looking for a picture,‚Äù she said, ‚Äúthat has a good subject‚ÅÝ‚Äîand that‚Äôs well arranged‚ÅÝ‚Äîbut badly coloured.‚Äù</p>
			<p>The little old ladies glanced at each other in some alarm. ‚ÄúCalm yourself, my dear,‚Äù said the one who had spoken first, ‚Äúand try to remember which it was. What <em>was</em> the subject?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWas it an elephant, for instance?‚Äù the other sister suggested. They were still in sight of <i epub:type="se:name.visual-art.painting">Lieutenant Brown</i>.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI don‚Äôt know, indeed!‚Äù Clara impetuously replied. ‚ÄúYou know it doesn‚Äôt matter a bit what the subject <em>is</em>, so long as it‚Äôs a good one!‚Äù</p>
			<p>Once more the sisters exchanged looks of alarm, and one of them whispered something to the other, of which Clara caught only the one word ‚Äúmad.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThey mean Aunt Mattie, of course,‚Äù she said to herself‚ÅÝ‚Äîfancying, in her innocence, that London was like her native town, where everybody knew everybody else. ‚ÄúIf you mean my aunt,‚Äù she added aloud, ‚Äúshe‚Äôs <em>there</em>‚ÅÝ‚Äîjust three pictures beyond <i epub:type="se:name.visual-art.painting">Lieutenant Brown</i>.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAh, well! Then you‚Äôd better go to her, my dear!‚Äù her new friend said, soothingly. ‚Äú<em>She‚Äôll</em> find you the picture you want. Goodbye, dear!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúGoodbye, dear!‚Äù echoed the other sister, ‚ÄúMind you don‚Äôt lose sight of your aunt!‚Äù And the pair trotted off into another room, leaving Clara rather perplexed at their manner.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThey‚Äôre real darlings!‚Äù she soliloquised. ‚ÄúI wonder why they pity me so!‚Äù And she wandered on, murmuring to herself ‚ÄúIt must have two good marks, and‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
