<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Knot 1: Excelsior</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-1" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">
					<span>Knot <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span></span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">Excelsior</span>
				</h2>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
					<p>“Goblin, lead them up and down.”</p>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>The ruddy glow of sunset was already fading into the sombre shadows of night, when two travellers might have been observed swiftly⁠—at a pace of six miles in the hour⁠—descending the rugged side of a mountain; the younger bounding from crag to crag with the agility of a fawn, while his companion, whose aged limbs seemed ill at ease in the heavy chain armour habitually worn by tourists in that district, toiled on painfully at his side.</p>
			<p>As is always the case under such circumstances, the younger knight was the first to break the silence.</p>
			<p>“A goodly pace, I trow!” he exclaimed. “We sped not thus in the ascent!”</p>
			<p>“Goodly, indeed!” the other echoed with a groan. “We clomb it but at three miles in the hour.”</p>
			<p>“And on the dead level our pace is⁠—?” the younger suggested; for he was weak in statistics, and left all such details to his aged companion.</p>
			<p>“Four miles in the hour,” the other wearily replied. “Not an ounce more,” he added, with that love of metaphor so common in old age, “and not a farthing less!”</p>
			<p>“ ’Twas three hours past high noon when we left our hostelry,” the young man said, musingly. “We shall scarce be back by supper-time. Perchance mine host will roundly deny us all food!”</p>
			<p>“He will chide our tardy return,” was the grave reply, “and such a rebuke will be meet.”</p>
			<p>“A brave conceit!” cried the other, with a merry laugh. “And should we bid him bring us yet another course, I trow his answer will be tart!”</p>
			<p>“We shall but get our deserts,” sighed the elder knight, who had never seen a joke in his life, and was somewhat displeased at his companion’s untimely levity. “ ’Twill be nine of the clock,” he added in an undertone, “by the time we regain our hostelry. Full many a mile shall we have plodded this day!”</p>
			<p>“How many? How many?” cried the eager youth, ever athirst for knowledge.</p>
			<p>The old man was silent.</p>
			<p>“Tell me,” he answered, after a moment’s thought, “what time it was when we stood together on yonder peak. Not exact to the minute!” he added hastily, reading a protest in the young man’s face. “An’ thy guess be within one poor half-hour of the mark, ’tis all I ask of thy mother’s son! Then will I tell thee, true to the last inch, how far we shall have trudged betwixt three and nine of the clock.”</p>
			<p>A groan was the young man’s only reply; while his convulsed features and the deep wrinkles that chased each other across his manly brow, revealed the abyss of arithmetical agony into which one chance question had plunged him.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
